# siWalk

SiWalk is a machine learning-based tool that predicts conserved siRNA production in Arabidopsis using a Random Forest classifier, complementing established methods.
It refines predictions by incorporating phase boundaries and a standardized genomic contig index.
SiWalk identifies siRNA precursors and active siRNAs based on structural and nucleotide patterns, while improving accuracy and minimizing false positives.

Copyright (c) 2024 Chao-Jung Wu, see License.

### Citation:
Please cite the paper for your work using this tool.

__Title__: Leveraging Machine Learning for Improved siRNA Prediction in Plant

__Cite__: Chao-Jung Wu, Abdoulaye Baniré Diallo

__BibTex__:
```
@article{... ...
}
```

Link to retrieve the paper: http...


### Dependencies:
__Languages__: `python/3.10.2` (scipy, statsmodels, sklearn, numpy)

__Packages__: `spark/3.3.0`, `bowtie/1.3.0`, `samtools/1.17`, `viennarna/2.5.1`, `perl/5.30.1`

__Distributed with siWalk__: `miRanda`, `miRCheck`

__Environments__: Users should run `siWalk` on servers that support parallel computing with `Spark`. This program was developed on Compute Canada clusters, primarily on Narval.



# Manual
Follow this manual to download and execute the siWalk project on a server.
You can use Compute Canada clusters or any other server infrastructure.

### M1. **Download siWalk from GitHub**
The siWalk project is available on GitHub at [github/JulieCJWu/siWalk](https://github.com/JulieCJWu/pipeline240320).

To access the release version associated with the paper, visit: 
[siWalk/releases/241106testlargefile](https://github.com/JulieCJWu/pipeline240320/releases/tag/241106testlargefile).
- Download the assets and install the source code.
- Place the file **background.tsv** in `/path/siWalk/dbs/` folder.
- Place the file **TAIR10_genomic.fa** in `/path/siWalk/dbs/TAIR10` folder.

### M2. Generate the **RFAs100** Model
3.1. Generate the **RFAs100** model (described in the paper but too large to be distributed with siWalk) using the following command.
Note that this step takes approximately 30 minutes on a personal computer.
```
cd /path/siWalk/src/
annotated_training_file=../dbs/background.tsv
python siWalk_pickle_localization.py $annotated_training_file
```
3.2. Rename the resulting model file to `RFAs100.pkl` and move it to `/path/siWalk/model/`.

### M3. **Description of supporting files**
Supporting files, including data for **Arabidopsis**, are bundled with siWalk.
Use these files to quickly start analyzing Arabidopsis sRNA-seq data.
- **background.tsv**: This file served as the Arabidopsis training set in the paper and contains a total of 185539 segment samples.
- **TAIR10_genomic.fa**: The [Arabidopsis genome](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/view/GCA_000001735.1) is provided for your convenience.
- dbs/**mature.fa**: miRNAs from [miRBase v22.1](https://mirbase.org/download/)
- dbs/**GSM1087998_C0RC1.txt**: an example expression library in readcount format,
  sourced from the [GSE44622](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE44622) series
- dbs/**feature_definition.txt**: definitions of variables that may appear in the analysis
- model/**GBA100.pkl**: machine learning model using Gradient Boosting with AdaBoost, based on the top 100 features as described in the paper
- model/**GBAs100.pkl**: machine learning model using Gradient Boosting with AdaBoost, based on the top 100 **structural** features as described in the paper
- model/**RFAs100.pkl**: machine learning model using Random Forest with AdaBoost, based on the top 100 **structural** features as described in the paper.
  This file is generated by users following the steps in **M2**.
- model/**Arabidopsis_feature_importance_n_correlation.tsv**: the feature evaluation datafile to pair with `GBA100.pkl`
- model/**Arabidopsis_strcture_feature_importance_n_correlation.tsv**: the feature evaluation datafile to pair with `GBAs100.pkl` and `RFAs100.pkl`



### M4. **Overview of core scripts**

- **submit_siWalk_precursor_features.sh**: see details in **A2**.
- **siWalk_classify_precursors.py**: see details in **A3**.
- **siWalk_predict_siRNA_location.py**: see details in **B1**.
- **siWalk_pickle_precursor.py**: see details in **X2**.
- **siWalk_pickle_localization.py**: see details in **X2**.

To support the prediction of precursors from expression libraries aligned in SAM format (**A1**), two distinct scripts are provided: one for computing precursor features (**A2**) and another for classifying precursors (**A3**).
These steps remain separate to allow for custom precursor labeling before classification, providing greater flexibility in the process.

For effector prediction from a precursor, a script scans the precursor sequence to identify and report the top six predicted siRNA candidates (**B1**).

To support the creation of a machine learning model using a custom training set (**X2**), two scripts are provided: one for generating a model using all feature types, and another for generating a model using only the structural features.


### M5. **Run siWalk on a server**

siWalk can be executed on various server infrastructures, such as Compute Canada or Microsoft Azure.
The setup involves modifying the job submission script according to the server environment.

#### 5a. **Use Compute Canada clusters (e.g., Narval)**

- **Modify the Submission File**: siWalk provides a template submission file for Narval on Compute Canada. To use it:
   - Update your **credentials** in the template.
   - Customize job parameters (e.g., CPUs, memory) based on your computational needs.

- **Submit the Job**:  
   The `submit_siWalk_precursor_features.sh` script requires **SLURM** and **Spark**. After customizing the submission file, submit it using the SLURM scheduling command. See details in **A2**.

#### 5b. **Use a Login Node for simple tasks on Compute Canada clusters**

The scripts `siWalk_classify_precursors.py`, `siWalk_predict_siRNA_location.py`, and `siWalk_pickle_precursor.py`, along with the steps to create a SAM file, are relatively simple tasks that can be executed on a personal computer with a properly set up environment, should you prefer that approach.

For running these tasks on a Compute Canada cluster, set up the environment as follows:
First, nevigate to a subfolder of siWalk,
```
cd /path/siWalk/workdir/
```

Then,
```
module load StdEnv/2020 viennarna/2.5.1 gcc/9.3.0 
module load blast+/2.14.0 samtools/1.17 bowtie/1.3.0 scipy-stack
chmod +x ../lib/miranda
virtualenv --no-download env
source env/bin/activate
pip install --no-index --upgrade pip
pip install --no-index statsmodels sklearn
```

#### 5c. **Use other servers**

For servers like **Microsoft Azure**, follow their specific instructions for job submission.
Although this has not been explicitly tested by the authors, the general steps are as follows:
- Upload the siWalk files to the server.
- Set up the environment by installing the necessary dependencies and configuring any required settings.
- Submit the job using Azure's task scheduling tools.



## Module A. precursor prediction

### A1. Create SAM file
siWalk requires **SAM** files as input for prediction.
To create these alignment files, follow the steps below to align sRNA-seq libraries to the appropriate genome reference.
While siWalk does not directly support this step, you can easily achieve it by:
1. Define the path to the `genome_file`.
2. Set the prefix for the genome using `index_prefix`.
3. Build `bowtie` genome reference index.
4. Create genome `.fai` index.

Example set up:
```
genome_file=/path/TAIR10_genomic.fa
index_prefix=/path/bowtie_index/TAIR10_genomic
```
Then run:
```
bowtie-build -f --quiet $genome_file $index_prefix
samtools faidx $genome_file
```

5. Prepare the library in `readcount` or `raw` format:
   - Ensure the library is in `readcount` format (each line contains a sequence and its occurrence) 
     or `raw` format (each line represents an occurrence of a sequence).
   - Use the provided helper script to convert `readcount` to `raw` format.
6. Align the library using `bowtie`:
   - Align your sRNA-seq library to the genome using `bowtie` and output the results in `.sam` format.
   - Depending on the size of the genome and library, processing time may vary
     (e.g., 20 minutes for **Arabidopsis**, 20 hours for **wheat** using 64 CPUs).
7. Obtain associated sorted `.bam` and index `.bai`/`.csi` files.

Example set up:
```
path_siWalk=/path/siWalk
filename=GSM1087998_C0RC1
infile=$path_siWalk/dbs/$filename.txt # in readcount format
```
Then run:
```
mkdir $path_siWalk/input
raw=$path_siWalk/input/$filename.raw
python $path_siWalk/src/rc2raw.py $infile > $raw
samfile=$path_siWalk/input/$filename.sam
bamfile=$path_siWalk/input/sorted_$filename.bam
bowtie -r $raw -x $index_prefix --threads 64 -v 0 --mm -a --sam --no-unal > $samfile
samtools sort $samfile > $bamfile
samtools index $bamfile #\\ or \\ samtools index -c $bamfile # for large genome
```

### A2. Generate features

8. Enter your credentials in the `submit_siWalk_precursor_features.sh` submission file.  
   Edit the following variables in the file to specify the input path for the `.sam`, `.bam`, and `.bai` files, 
   as well as the file path to the reference genome. 
```
INPUT_SAM_PATH=/path/siWalk/input
genome_file=/path/TAIR10_genomic.fa
```

9. Submit the job to the queue from the `workdir` folder, and take note of the **job ID**.
```
cd /path/siWalk/workdir/
sbatch submit_siWalk_precursor_features.sh
```

10. Locate output files:
    - Output files, including the `annotation_file` of expression and structural features (`$filename.contig_features.tsv`), 
     will be available in the folder `/path/siWalk/output/$jobID/$filename/`.

Check that the output files have been generated:
```
ls /path/siWalk/output/$jobID/$filename/
annotation_file=/path/siWalk/output/$jobID/$filename/$filename.contig_features.tsv
head -n 3 $annotation_file
```
   
### A3. Predict precursor segments
11. Run precursor classification:
    - Use the script `siWalk_classify_precursors.py` to predict precursor segments by passing the `annotation_file` from the previous step.
```
cd /path/siWalk/src/
python siWalk_classify_precursors.py $annotation_file
```

12. Retrieve prediction results:
    - The output, including the predicted siRNA-generating loci, will be available as `prefix.prediction.tsv` in the same folder as the `annotation_file`.
    - Key columns include:
      - **CONTIG**: 5250-nt genomic region defined by coordinates (e.g., `3__5860000_5865250` on chromosome 3).
      - **eff_strand**: coordinate of the most abundant effector siRNA allowing drift.
      - **eff_seq**: sequence of the most abundant effector siRNA.
      - **segment**: predicted start and end positions of the siRNA-generating locus.
      - **Predicted_Class**: classification of the locus as an siRNA precursor (`true` or `false`) predicted by the model.

Check the output file:
```
file=/path/siWalk/output/$jobID/$filename/*prediction.tsv
head -n 3 $file
```



## Module B. effector prediction from a precursor

### B1. Provide your precursor sequence, and generate structural features
1. **Run the siWalk script** to scan the precursor sequence and identify the most likely effector siRNA location:
    - The script `siWalk_predict_siRNA_location.py` requires an input sequence (**priseq**) 
      and the **DicerCall** parameter to define the dicing interval (e.g., 21 nt).
    - For optimal performance, it is recommended to limit precursor sequences to a **maximum of 200 nucleotides** 
      to ensure efficient identification of local siRNA candidates,
      although there is no limitation on sequence length.
```
cd /path/siWalk/src/
priseq=CTTGACCTTGTAAGGCCTTTTCTTGACCTTGTAAGACCCCATCTCTTTCTAAACGTTTTATTATTTTCTCGTTTTACAGATTCTATTCTATCTCTTCTCAATATAGAATAGATATCTATCT
DicerCall=21
python siWalk_predict_siRNA_location.py $priseq $DicerCall
```

### B2. Obtain the recommendations of the most likely start and end positions of effector siRNA on a precursor
2. Retrieve the result file from the `/path/siWalk/output/timestamp/` folder.
You will find the following output files:
    - **yourPrecursor.effector_localization_indication.tsv**: Contains the predicted effector localization information.
    - **yourPrecursor.effector_localization_indication.png**: A graphical representation of the predicted localization.
    - **yourPrecursor.effector_localization_indication_top6_recommendation.tsv**: Contains the top 6 predicted siRNA candidates from the precursor.

The most likely effector positions will also be displayed in the **standard output**.
Stdout example:
```
> yourPrecursor, predicted siRNA start: 38, end: 59, score: 749.860201
```

## Module X. train a machine learning model

### X1. Create the training dataset

1. **Construct the training dataset**  
    - For each precursor candidate, compute the relevant features as outlined in **A2**.  

2. **Annotate the dataset with class labels**  
    - Add a `consistent` column, where each instance is labeled as **True** or **False**, 
      indicating whether the candidate corresponds to a true precursor (**True**) or a non-precursor (**False**).  
    - Ensure that the dataset contains a sufficient number of positive and negative examples.
    - This labeling process is user-defined and should be tailored according to the specific dataset and classification requirements.

3. The resulting file will be the `annotated_training_file` for the next step.


### X2. Generate the model
4. Considering **top 100 overall attributes**, run the script `siWalk_pickle_precursor.py` to train the machine learning model:
    - This script will produce several output files, including:
       - output/prefix_**GradientBoostingWithAdaBoost_model.pkl**: trained model with a timestamp for version control.
       - output/prefix_**feature_importance_n_correlation.tsv**: feature evaluation file listing the ranked importance of features and their correlation with precursor classes.
    - The model generated by this script, trained on the provided `background.tsv` file, is the **GBA100** model described in the paper, 
      which is also included with the siWalk distribution.
    - Models in this category are intended solely for precursor predictions.  
```
cd /path/siWalk/src/
annotated_training_file=../dbs/background.tsv #\\ or \\ annotated_training_file=from_X1
python siWalk_pickle_precursor.py $annotated_training_file
```

5. Considering **top 100 structural attributes**, run the script `siWalk_pickle_localization.py` to train the machine learning model:
    - This script will produce several output files, including:
       - output/prefix_**RandomForestWithAdaBoost_model.pkl**: trained model with a timestamp for version control.
       - output/prefix_**strcture_feature_importance_n_correlation.tsv**: feature evaluation file listing the ranked importance of structural features and their correlation with precursor classes.
    - The model generated by this script, trained on the provided `background.tsv` file, is the **RFAs100** model (also detailed in **M2**).
    - Models in this category are suitable for both precursor and effector predictions.
```
cd /path/siWalk/src/
annotated_training_file=../dbs/background.tsv #\\ or \\ annotated_training_file=from_X1
python siWalk_pickle_localization.py $annotated_training_file
```
